# High vs low-level programming

The level indicates the amount of abstraction between **programming language** and **machine language** (which is a set of instructions executed directly by CPU and is the 
only language a computer is capable of understanding). 

A **low-level programming** language is a programming language that provides little to no abstraction of programming concepts and is very close to hardware 
(Assembly language or maschine code). Programs written in low-level language are directly executable on the computing hardware without any compiler or interpreter. 
With low-level lagnuages, the programmer has a complete control over things like memory allocation, which makes them very efficient. Because of these, they are great 
for writing operating systems/firmware. \
P.S: _abstractie = a nu lua in considerare // abastraction = does not take into consideration_

Because **high-level languages** are closer to human language, and because they have a very strong abstraction, code written in high-level programming languages is easier 
to read, write and maintain. Programmrs don't have to think anymore about things like registers or memory management. Instead, they can rely on functions, objects or
garbage collector, and other abstractions.

## Machine code

In computer programming, **machine code** is any low-level programming language, consisting of machine language instructions, which is used to control a computer's 
central processing unit (CPU). Each instruction causes the CPU to perform a very specific task, such as a load, a store, a jump, or an arithmetic logic unit (ALU) operation 
on one or more units of data in the CPU's registers or memory.

Machine code is a strictly numerical language which is designed to run as fast as possible, and may be considered as the lowest-level representation of a compiled or 
assembled computer program or as a primitive and hardware-dependent programming language. While it is possible to write programs directly in machine code, managing individual 
bits and calculating numerical addresses and constants manually is tedious and error-prone. For this reason, programs are very rarely written directly in machine code in 
modern contexts, but may be done for low level debugging, program patching (especially when assembler source is not available) and assembly language disassembly.

The majority of practical programs today are written in higher-level languages or assembly language. The source code is then translated to executable machine code by utilities 
such as **compilers**, **assemblers**, and **linkers**, with the important exception of interpreted programs, which are not translated into machine code. However, the 
**interpreter** itself, which may be seen as an executor or processor performing the instructions of the source code, typically consists of directly executable machine code 
(generated from assembly or high-level language source code).

Machine code is by definition the lowest level of programming detail visible to the programmer, but internally many processors use microcode or optimise and transform machine 
code instructions into sequences of micro-ops. This is not generally considered to be a machine code.

[Read more](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_code)

## Compiler

In computing, a **compiler** is a computer program that translates computer code written in one programming language (the source language) into another language (the target 
language). The name "compiler" is primarily used for programs that translate source code from a high-level programming language to a lower level language (e.g. assembly 
language, object code, or machine code) to create an executable program

Read more: [1](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_code), [2](https://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/compiler)

## Assembler

An **assembler** is a type of computer program that interprets software programs written in assembly language into machine language, code and instructions that can be executed 
by a computer. An assembler enables software and application developers to access, operate and manage a computer's hardware architecture and components. An assembler is 
sometimes referred to as the compiler of assembly language. It also provides the services of an interpreter.

An assembler primarily serves as the bridge between symbolically coded instructions written in assembly language and the computer processor, memory and other computational 
components. An assembler works by assembling and converting the source code of assembly language into object code or an object file that constitutes a stream of zeros and 
ones of machine code, which are directly executable by the processor.

[Read more](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Assembly_language#Assembler)

## Linker

In computing, a **linker** or **link editor** is a computer system program that takes one or more object files (generated by a compiler or an assembler) and combines them into
a single executable file, library file, or another "object" file. A simpler version that writes its output directly to memory is called the loader, though loading is typically 
considered a separate process.

[Read more](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linker_(computing))

## Interpreter

In computer science, an **interpreter** is a computer program that directly executes instructions written in a programming or scripting language, without requiring them 
previously to have been compiled into a machine language program.

[Read more](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interpreter_(computing))

## Object File

An **object file** is a computer file containing object code, that is, machine code output of an assembler or compiler. The object code is usually relocatable, 
and not usually directly executable. There are various formats for object files, and the same machine code can be packaged in different object file formats. 
An object file may also work like a shared library.

[Read more](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Object_file)

